Rules of the road
Steering and Sailing Rules - Section Three

Rule Nineteen Conduct of Vessels in Restricted Visibility (contd.)


>>> Click to see rule

a. This Rule applies to vessels not in sight of one another when navigating in or near an area of restricted visibility.

b. Every vessel shall proceed at a safe speed adapted to the prevailing circumstances and conditions of restricted visibility. A power-driven vessel shall have her engines ready for immediate manoeuvre.

c. Every vessel shall have due regard to the prevailing circumstances and conditions of restricted visibility when complying with the Rules of Section I of this Part.

d. A vessel which detects by radar alone the presence of another vessel shall determine if a close-quarters situation is developing and / or risk exists. If so, she shall take avoiding action in ample time, provided that when such action consists of an alteration of course, so far as possible, the following shall be avoided :
i. an alteration of course to port for a vessel forward of the beam, other than for a vessel being overtaken.
ii. an alteration of course towards a vessel abeam or abaft the beam.

e. Except where it has been determined that a risk of collision does not exist, every vessel which hears apparently forward of her beam the fog signal of another vessel or which cannot avoid the close-quarters situation with another vessel forward of her beam, shall reduce her speed to the minimum at which she can be kept on her course. She shall, if necessary, take all her way off and in any event, navigate with extreme caution until the danger of collision is over.

<<<

b. Every vessel must proceed at a safe speed depending on the ambient conditions. This is dictated by

● The size of the ship.

● The visibility and ambient lighting conditions.

● The physical features of the sea and the surroundings.

● The traffic area and density the vessel finds herself in.

● The maneuverability and

● The presence or absence of radar.

The extent of visibility dictates when a ship should reduce her speed. Stopping power and distances should also be considered. If the visibility is less than miles a vessel should keep her engines on-standby as a fog can develop very quickly.

Use radar to indicate the extent and movement of either a rainstorm or snowsquall and to detect other vessels in the proximity of your ship. These other saucers could also be detected when they are outside the rainstorm observed on radar.

Some captains may be reluctant to reduce speed in the light of tight schedules which they have to maintain. However at sea safety takes precedence over any schedule however tight it may be.