Rules of the road
Steering and Sailing Rules - Section Three

Rule Nineteen Conduct of Vessels in Restricted Visibility (contd.)


>>> Click to see rule

a. This Rule applies to vessels not in sight of one another when navigating in or near an area of restricted visibility.

b. Every vessel shall proceed at a safe speed adapted to the prevailing circumstances and conditions of restricted visibility. A power-driven vessel shall have her engines ready for immediate manoeuvre.

c. Every vessel shall have due regard to the prevailing circumstances and conditions of restricted visibility when complying with the Rules of Section I of this Part.

d. A vessel which detects by radar alone the presence of another vessel shall determine if a close-quarters situation is developing and / or risk exists. If so, she shall take avoiding action in ample time, provided that when such action consists of an alteration of course, so far as possible, the following shall be avoided :
i. an alteration of course to port for a vessel forward of the beam, other than for a vessel being overtaken.
ii. an alteration of course towards a vessel abeam or abaft the beam.

e. Except where it has been determined that a risk of collision does not exist, every vessel which hears apparently forward of her beam the fog signal of another vessel or which cannot avoid the close-quarters situation with another vessel forward of her beam, shall reduce her speed to the minimum at which she can be kept on her course. She shall, if necessary, take all her way off and in any event, navigate with extreme caution until the danger of collision is over.

<<<

d. In case one vessel detects another on radar alone without sighting her visually or detecting her sound signals she shall at once try and determine whether a close-quarters situation is developing and a risk of collision is present. If such a situation is present or in danger of developing the said vessel shall.

Make the appropriate collision avoidance maneuvers in ample time.

However the vessel shall try to avoid the following.

● She shall not alter course to port for a vessel forward of the beam. This does not apply to vessel being overtaken.

● She shall not alter course towards a vessel abeam or abaft the beam.

Captains and navigating officers must apply Rules and dealing with lookouts risk of collision and avoiding action.

Alteration of course to port by say vessel A should be avoided for a vessel forward of beam of vessel A. But if say vessel A is overtaking vessel B then alteration of course to port by vessel A is permissible.