Rules of the road
Steering and Sailing Rules - Section One

Rule Six Safe Speed (contd.)

Radar Interference (contd.)


>>> Click to see rule

Every vessel shall at all times proceed at a safe speed so that she can take proper and effective action to avoid collision and be stopped within a distance appropriate to the prevailing circumstances and conditions.

In determining a safe speed, the following factors shall be among those taken into account:

a.  By all vessels:

i. The state of visibility.

ii. The traffic density, including concentrations of fishing vessels or any other vessels.

iii. The manoeuverability of the vessel with special reference to stopping distance and turning ability in the prevailing conditions.

iv. At night, the presence of background light such as from the shore or from backscatter of her own lights.

v. The state of the wind, the sea and current and the proximity of navigational hazards, and

vi. The draught in relation to the available depth of water.

b.  Additionally, by vessels with operational radar:

i. The characteristics, efficiency and limitations of the radar equipment.

ii. Any constraint imposed by the radar range scale in use.

iii. The effect on radar detection of the sea state, weather and other sources of interference.

iv. The possibility that small vessels, ice and other floating objects may not be detected by radar at an adequate range.

v. The number, location and movement of vessels detected by radar, and

vi. The more exact assessment of the visibility that may be possible when radar is used to determine the range of vessels or other objects in the vicinity.


<<<

● Small icebergs that could be a threat to navigation should be detected at a range of miles smooth top bergs may go undetected and should be hunted for. In areas known for small vessels and icebergs safe speed should be judiciously decided.

● In traffic separation schemes with restricted visibility it may not be possible to reduce speed to low as this may result in your vessel being frequently overtaken by others. The possibility of smaller craft and other vessels crossing must also be taken into account when determining safe speed.

● The greater the number of targets the lesser should be the safe speed.
Of the vessel.

● In areas like the North Western Atlantic North Pacific and North Western Europe higher levels of.
Caution are required during the dark hours watch keepiing officers should take care of restrictions in visibility and must make full use of radar.
