Rules of the road
Steering and Sailing Rules - Section One

Rule Five Lookouts and Watchkeeping (contd.)

Mandatory Standards for Safe Watchkeeping (contd.)



>>> Click to see rule


16. In determining that the composition of the navigational watch is adequate to ensure that a proper look-out can continuously be maintained, the Master shall take into account all relevant factors, including those described in this section of the Code, as well as the following factors:

1. Visibility, state of weather and sea;

2. Traffic density, and other activities occurring in the area in which the vessel is navigating;

3. The attention necessary when navigating in or near traffic separation schemes or other routeing measures;

4. The additional workload caused by the nature of the ship's functions, immediate operating requirements and anticipated maneuvers;

5. The fitness for duty of any crew members on call who are assigned as members of the watch;

6.  Knowledge of, and confidence in, the professional competence of the ship's officers and crew;

7. The experience of each officer of the watch, and the familiarity of that officer with the ship's equipment, procedures and maneuvering capability;

8. Activities taking place on board the ship at any particular time, including radio communication activities and the availability of assistance to be summoned immediately to the bridge when necessary;

9. The operational status of bridge instrumentation and controls, including alarm systems;

10. Rudder and propeller control and ship maneuvering characteristics;

11. The size of the ship and the field of vision available from the conning position;

12. The configuration of the bridge, to the extent that such configuration might inhibit a member of the watch from detecting by sight or hearing any external development; and

13. Any other relevant standard, procedure or guidance relating to watchkeeping arrangements and fitness for duty which has been adopted by the Organization.



<<<

16. Factors to be considered by the Master to ensure proper lookout (contd.)


	D. The additional workload caused by the ships functions to the lookout.

	E. The fitness for duty of all crew members who may be required to perform lookout duty.

	F. Knowledge of and confidence in the professional expertise of the navigating crew.

	G. The experience of each Officer of the Watch and his familiarity with the ships equipment 	procedures and maneuvering capabilities.

	H. Inboard activities taking place including radiocommunication activities.

	I. The operational status of bridge instrumentation and controls including alarm systems 	rudder and propeller control and ship maneuvering characteristics.

	K. The size of the ship and the view available from the commanding position.

	I. The configuration of the bridge with an eye to impediments to the watchkeeper.

	M. Any other approved and relevant standard procedure or guidance relating to watchkeeping 	arrangements and fitness for duty.