Rules of the road
Steering and Sailing Rules - Section One

Rule Five Lookouts and Watchkeeping (contd.)

Basic Principles for Safe Watchkeeping Regulation 1/1(contd.)


>>> Click to see rule


8. Navigational duties and responsibilities

(a) The officer in charge of the watch shall:

(i) keep his watch on the bridge which he shall in no circumstances leave until properly relieved;

(ii) continue to be responsible for the safe navigation of the ship, despite the presence of the Master on the bridge, until the Master informs him specifically that he has assumed that responsibility and this is mutually understood; 

(iii) notify the Master when in any doubt as to what action to lake in the interest of safety:

(iv) not hand over the watch to the relieving officer if he has reason to believe that the latter is obviously not capable of carrying out his duties effectively, in which case he shall notify the Master accordingly.

(b) On taking over the watch the relieving officer shall satisfy himself as to the ship's estimated or true position and confirm its intended track, course and speed and shall note any dangers to navigation expected to be encountered during his watch.

(c) A proper record shall be kept of the movements and activities during the watch relating to the navigation of the ship.


<<<

8. Navigational Duties and Responsibilities


A. The Officer of the Watch shall.
	I. Remain on the bridge and keep watch until properly relieved.
	II. Continue to be responsible for the safe navigation of the ship until expressed relieved by 	the vessels Captain by verbal order.
	III. Notify the Captain when in any doubt as to the next course of action to be taken.
	IV. Not hand over watch duty to the relieving officer if he feels that the said officer is not 	competent for the said duty he is to notify the Captain immediately.

B. The relieving officer shall satisfy himself as to the ships true position and confirm her intended track course speed and note any navigational danger, if present or expected to be encountered during his watch.