Rules of the road
Steering and Sailing Rules - Section One

Rule Five Lookouts and Watchkeeping (contd.)

Mandatory Standards for Safe Watchkeeping (contd.)

Performing a Navigational Watch (contd.)


>>> Click to see rule

Ship at anchor

51. If the Master considers it necessary, a continuous navigational watch shall be maintained at anchor. While at anchor, the officer in charge of the navigational watch shall:

1. Determine and plot the ship's position on the appropriate chart as soon as practicable;

2. When circumstances permit, check at sufficiently frequent intervals whether the ship is remaining securely at anchor by taking bearings of fixed navigation marks or readily identifiable shore objects;

3. Ensure that proper look-out is maintained;

4. Ensure that inspection rounds of the ship are made periodically;

5. Observe meteorological and tidal conditions and the state of the sea;

6. Notify the Master and undertake all necessary measures if the ship drags anchor;

7. Ensure that the state of readiness of the main engines and other machinery is in accordance with the Master's instructions;

8. If visibility deteriorates, notify the Master;

9. Ensure that the ship exhibits the appropriate lights and shapes and that appropriate sound signals are made in accordance with all applicable regulations; and

10. Take measures to protect the environment from pollution by the ship and comply with applicable pollution regulations.


<<<

Watchkeeping with the Ship at Anchor

51. Shall be carried out on instruction from the Captain. An Officer of the Watch shall.

● Determine and plot the position of the ship on a chart.

● Frequently check whether the ship has remained at anchor at the original anchoring spot.

● Ensure a proper lookout is maintained.

● Ensure periodic inspection rounds are performed on board.

● Observe meteorological and tidal conditions and the state of the sea.

● Notify the Captain and take precautions if the ship drags anchor.

● Ensure engines are in readiness and in accordance with the Captains instructions.

● Notify the Captain if visibility deteriorates.

● Ensure that the ship exhibits the appropriate lights shapes and signals while at anchor.

● Take measures to protect the environment from pollution by the ship.