Rules of the road
Steering and Sailing Rules - Section One

Rule Five Lookouts and Watchkeeping (contd.)

Mandatory Standards for Safe Watchkeeping (contd.)

Guidelines regarding Watchkeeping Arrangements and Principles to be Observed (contd.)


>>> Click to see rule

5. Companies should also issue guidance to masters and officers in charge of the navigational watch on each ship concerning the need for continuously reassessing how bridge-watch resources are being allocated and used, based on <bi> bridge <.bi> resource management principles such as the following:

1. A sufficient number of qualified individuals should be on watch to ensure all duties can be performed effectively;

2. All members of the navigational watch should be appropriately qualified and fit to perform their duties efficiently and effectively or the officer in charge of the navigational watch should take into account any limitation in qualifications or fitness of the individuals available when making navigational and operational decisions;

3. Duties should be clearly and unambiguously assigned to specific individuals who should confirm that they understand their responsibilities:

4. Tasks should be performed according to a clear order of priority;

5. No member of the navigational watch should be assigned more duties or more difficult tasks than can be performed effectively;

6. Individuals should be assigned at all times to locations at which they can most efficiently and effectively perform their duties and individuals should be reassigned to other locations as circumstances may require;

7. Members of the navigational watch should not be assigned to different duties, tasks or locations until the officer in charge of the watch is certain that the adjustment can be accomplished efficiently and effectively:

8. Instruments and equipment considered necessary for effective performance of duties should be readily available to appropriate members in charge of the navigational watch;

9. Communications among members of the watch should be clear, immediate, reliable and relevant to the business at hand;

10. Non-essential activity and distractions should be avoided, suppressed or removed;

11. All <bi> bridge <.bi> equipment should be operating properly and if not the officer in charge of the navigational watch should take into account any malfunction which may exist in making operational decisions;

12. All essential information should be collected, processed and interpreted and made conveniently available to those who require it for the performance of their duties;

13. Non-essential materials should not be placed on the <bi> bridge <.bi> or any work surface; and

14. Members of the navigational watch should at all times be prepared to respond efficiently and effectively to changes in circumstances.

<<<

H. Instruments and equipment needed should be readily available to the watchkeeping officers and the Officer of the Watch.

I. Communications among members of the watch should be clear immediately reliable and relevant to the task at hand.

J. Nonessential activities or distractions should be avoided or removed as quickly as possible.

K. All <bi> bridge <.bi> equipment should be in proper operation. The Officer of the Watch should consider any malfunction when making a navigational decision.

I. All essential information should be collected processed interpreted and made available to.
Those in need of it.

M. Nonessential materials should not be placed on the <bi> bridge <.bi> or on any worksurface.

