Rules of the road
Steering and Sailing Rules - Section One

Rule Five Lookouts and Watchkeeping (contd.)

Basic Principles for Safe Watchkeeping <bi> Regulation <.bi> 1/1(contd.)


>>> Click to see rule



5. Fitness for duty
The watch system shall be such that the efficiency of watchkeeping officers and watchkeeping ratings is not impaired by fatigue. Duties shall be so organized that the first watch at the commencement of a voyage and the subsequent relieving watches are sufficiently rested and otherwise fit for duty.

6. Navigation
(a) The intended voyage shall be planned in advance taking into consideration all pertinent information and any course laid down shall be checked before the voyage commences.

(b) During the watch the course steered, position and speed shall be checked at sufficiently frequent intervals, using any available navigational aids necessary, to ensure that the ship follows the planned course.

(c) The Officer of the Watch shall have full knowledge of the location and operation of all safety and navigational equipment on board the ship and shall be aware and take account of the operating limitations of such equipment.

(d) The officer in charge of a navigational watch shall not be assigned or undertake any duties which would interfere with the safe <bi> navigation <.bi> of the ship.


<<<

5. Fitness for Duty

The watchkeeping system shall be so designed that the efficiency of the watchkeeping personnel is
not impaired by fatigue. The schedule should be so designed that all watchkeeping personnel are sufficiently rested and fit for duty. 

6. Navigation

A. Advance planning is needed for every voyage taking into account all necessary information including the details of the course planned.

B. The course position and speed of the vessel must be checked during every watch using whatever navigational aids the vessel may possess.

C. The Officer of the Watch must be absolutely familiar with all the safety and navigational aids present on the vessel with their shortcomings if any.

D. No other duties that will unduly distract the Officer of the Watch should be allocated to him.