Rules of the road
Steering and Sailing Rules - Section One

Rule Five Lookouts and Watchkeeping (contd.)

Mandatory Standards for Safe Watchkeeping (contd.)

Guidelines regarding Watchkeeping Arrangements and Principles to be Observed contd.


>>> Click to see rule

5. Companies should also issue guidance to Masters and officers in charge of the navigational watch on each ship concerning the need for continuously reassessing how bridge-watch resources are being allocated and used, based on <bi> bridge <.bi> resource management principles such as the following:

1. A sufficient number of qualified individuals should be on watch to ensure all duties can be performed effectively;

2. All members of the navigational watch should be appropriately qualified and fit to perform their duties efficiently and effectively or the officer in charge of the navigational watch should take into account any limitation in qualifications or fitness of the individuals available when making navigational and operational decisions;

3. Duties should be clearly and unambiguously assigned to specific individuals who should confirm that they understand their responsibilities:

4. Tasks should be performed according to a clear order of priority;

5. No member of the navigational watch should be assigned more duties or more difficult tasks than can be performed effectively;

6. Individuals should be assigned at all times to locations at which they can most efficiently and effectively perform their duties and individuals should be reassigned to other locations as circumstances may require;

7. Members of the navigational watch should not be assigned to different duties, tasks or locations until the officer in charge of the watch is certain that the adjustment can be accomplished efficiently and effectively:

8. Instruments and equipment considered necessary for effective performance of duties should be readily available to appropriate members in charge of the navigational watch;

9. Communications among members of the watch should be clear, immediate, reliable and relevant to the business at hand;

10. Non-essential activity and distractions should be avoided, suppressed or removed;

11. All <bi> bridge <.bi> equipment should be operating properly and if not the officer in charge of the navigational watch should take into account any malfunction which may exist in making operational decisions;

12. All essential information should be collected processed and interpreted and made conveniently available to those who require it for the performance of their duties;

13. Non-essential materials should not be placed on the <bi> bridge <.bi> or any work surface; and

14. Members of the navigational watch should at all times be prepared to respond efficiently and effectively to changes in circumstances.


<<<

5. The guidelines that companies need to issue to Captain and Officers of the Watch on assessing the use of bridge- watch resources are as follows.

A. A sufficient number of qualified individuals should be on watch at all times.

B. The Officer of the Watch should note and consider any limitations in qualification or fitness of the.
Watchkeeping officers.

C. Watchkeeping and other <bi> bridge <.bi> duties should be clearly explained and confirmation of.
Understanding taken.

D. Tasks should be prioritized and performed accordingly.

E. Every watchkeeping person should be allocated just as much duty as he can effectively perform.

F. Individuals should be optimally located to where they can effectively perform their duties.

G. No member of a navigational watch shall be shifted to a different task duty or location until the officer of the Watch is certain that the adjustment can be accomplished effectively and efficiently.