Rules of the road
Steering and Sailing Rules - Section One

Rule Six Safe Speed (contd.)


>>> Click to see rule

Every vessel shall at all times proceed at a safe speed so that she can take proper and effective action to avoid collision and be stopped within a distance appropriate to the prevailing circumstances and conditions.

In determining a safe speed, the following factors shall be among those taken into account:

a.  By all vessels:

i. The state of visibility.

ii. The traffic density, including concentrations of fishing vessels or any other vessels.

iii. The manoeuverability of the vessel with special reference to stopping distance and turning ability in the prevailing conditions.

iv. At night, the presence of background light such as from the shore or from backscatter of her own lights.

v. The state of the wind, the sea and current and the proximity of navigational hazards, and

vi. The draught in relation to the available depth of water.

b.  Additionally, by vessels with operational radar:

i. The characteristics, efficiency and limitations of the radar equipment.

ii. Any constraint imposed by the radar range scale in use.

iii. The effect on radar detection of the sea state, weather and other sources of interference.

iv. The possibility that small vessels, ice and other floating objects may not be detected by radar at an adequate range.

v. The number, location and movement of vessels detected by radar, and

vi. The more exact assessment of the visibility that may be possible when radar is used to determine the range of vessels or other objects in the vicinity.


<<<

When a vessel is fitted with an operational radar.

● Radar must be used for justification of going at a higher speed.

● The human eye is better than radar as the latter may fail to pick up small objects like small boats or floating debris.

● All vessels of gross tons and upwards must have Automatic Radar Plotting Aids area specified by the limo solar. A dedicated person competent in the use and deciphering of radar images must be stationed at the screen especially in conditions of restricted visibility nicety de Larrinaga situla.

● The range scale used is important the longer the range scale definition the less is the discrimination. Small targets are likely to be overlooked.

● Shorter range scales do not permit early detection of targets and do not provide an overall picture when there are a number of vessels in the vicinity.

● The most suitable range scale for the situation should be selected but this should be changed at regular intervals.

● Do not change the range scale when there is a dangerous target at close range.