Rules of the road
Steering and Sailing Rules - Section One

Rule Five Lookouts and Watchkeeping (contd.)

Basic Principles for Safe Watchkeeping Regulation 1/1(contd.)


>>> Click to see rule

9. Look-out
In addition to maintaining a proper look-out for the purpose of fully appraising the situation and the risk of collision, stranding and other dangers to navigation, the duties of the look-out shall include the detection of ships or aircraft in distress, shipwrecked persons, wrecks and debris. In maintaining a look-out the following shall be observed:

(a) the look-out must be able to give full attention to the keeping of a proper look-out and no other duties shall be undertaken or assigned which could interfere with that task;

(b) the duties of the look-out and helmsman are separate and the helmsman shall not be considered to be the look-out while steering, except in small ships where an unobstructed all-round view is provided at the steering position and there is no impairment of night vision or other impediment to the keeping of a proper look-out. The officer in charge of the watch may be the sole look-out in daylight provided that on each such occasion:

(i) the situation has been carefully assessed and it has been established without doubt that it is safe to do so;

(ii) full account has been taken of all relevant factors including, but not limited to:
- state of weather
- visibility
- traffic density
- proximity of danger to navigation
- the attention necessary when navigating in or near traffic separation schemes;

(iii) assistance is immediately available to be summoned to the bridge when any change in the situation so requires.


<<<

9. Look-out

A proper lookout shall 

● Keep watch for collision stranding and other dangers to navigation.

● detect other ships or aircraft in distress and pass on this information to the Officer of the Watch or the Captain.

● keep watch for shipwrecked persons wrecks and floating or other debris.

a. Lookout personnel should not be assigned any other task that will affect their duties.
b. Duties of the lookout and helmsman are separate and the helmsman shall not be considered to be on lookout while steering. The Officer of the Watch may be the sole lookout in daylight only if -

	I. The situation has been assessed and is found safe.
	
	II. The weather traffic density proximity of danger to navigation and.
	
	III. The attention necessary is given when navigating close to traffic separation schemes.

	IV. assistance is immediately available and can be summoned to the bridge. 