Rules of the road
Steering and Sailing Rules - Section One

Rule Five Lookouts and Watchkeeping (contd.)

Mandatory Standards for Safe Watchkeeping (contd.)

Taking Over the Watch (contd.)



>>> Click to see rule

21. Relieving officers shall personally satisfy themselves regarding the:

1. Standing orders and other special instructions of the master relating to navigation of the ship;

2. Position, course, speed and draught of the ship;

3. Prevailing and predicted tides, currents, weather, visibility and the effect of these factors upon course and speed;

4. Procedures for the use of main engines to manoeuvre when the main engines are on bridge control; and

5. Navigational situation, including but not limited to:
5.1 The operational condition of all navigational and safety equipment being used or likely to be used during the watch,
5.2 The errors of gyro and magnetic compasses,
5.3 The presence and movement of ships in sight or known to be in the vicinity,
5.4 The conditions and hazards likely to be encountered during the watch, and
5.5 The possible effects of heel, trim, water density and squat on under keel clearance.

22. If at any time the officer in charge of the navigational watch is to be relieved when a manoeuvre or other action to avoid any hazard is taking place, the relief of that officer shall be deferred until such action has been completed.


<<<

21. Relieving officers shall also satisfy themselves regarding.

	● Standing orders issued by the Captain.

	● Position course speed and drought of the ship.

	● Prevailing and predicted tides weather visibility and the effect of these on course and speed.

	● Procedures for use of main engines when these are under bridge control.

	● Navigational situation including the condition of all navigational and safety equipment.

	● The presence and movement of other ships in sight or invisible because of fog or weather conditions.

	● The conditions and hazards likely to be encountered during a watch.

	● The possible effects of heel trim squat and water density on undersell clearance.

	● All hazard avoidance maneuvers shall be completed before the changing of a watch. If any such.

	● Activity is taking place the changing of the watch shall be deferred till the said action is completed.