Rules of the road
Application Responsibility and Definitions


IRPCS: Rule One (contd.)

Application (contd.)


>>> Click to see rule

a) These rules shall apply to all vessels upon the high seas and in all waters connected therewith navigable by seagoing vessels.

b) Nothing in these Rules shall interfere with the operation of special rules made by an appropriate authority for roadsteads, harbours, rivers, lakes or inland waterways connected with the high seas and navigable by seagoing vessels.  Such special rules shall conform as closely as possible to these Rules.

c) Nothing in these Rules shall interfere with the operation of any special rules made by the Government of any State with respect to additional station or signal lights, shapes or whistle signals for ships of war and vessels proceeding under convoy, or with respect to additional station or signal lights or shapes for fishing vessels engaged in fishing as a fleet.  These additional station or signal lights, shapes or whistle signals shall, so far as possible, be such that they cannot be mistaken for for any light, shape or signal authorized elsewhere under these Rules.

d) Traffic separation schemes may be adopted by the Organization for the purpose of these Rules.

e) Whenever the Government concerned shall have determined that a vessel of special construction or purpose cannot comply fully with the provisions of these Rules with respect to the number, position, range or arc of visibility of lights or shapes, as well as to the disposition and characteristics of sound-signalling appliances, such vessel shall comply with such other provisions in regard to the number, position, range or arc of visibility of lights or shapes, as well as to the disposition and characteristics of sound-signalling appliances, as her Government shall have determined to be the closest possible compliance with these Rules in respect of that vessel.

<<<

C) These Rules shall not interfere with any Rules created by a Government of any State. Any

lights shapes or signals created or included in these additional Rules should not be mistaken

for any lights shapes or signals in the Rules.
