Rules of the road
Steering and Sailing Rules - Section One (contd.)

Rule Nine: Narrow Channels (contd.)


>>> Overtaking vessel

10. Entering a Channel. Unlike a vessel entering a TSS, there exists
no <bi> rule <.bi> on the conduct of vessels entering a narrow channel. Vessels are to
conduct themselves based on good <bi> seamanship <.bi> and follow the following
guidelines: -
(i) A vessel entering a channel must keep clear of all vessels
already in the channel.
(ii) A vessel already in the channel must navigate prudently taking
into account the aspirations of the vessel trying to enter.
(iii) When two vessels are converging at the channel mouth both
intending to enter, the vessel reaching the channel mouth first must be
allowed to enter first.
(iv) A vessel must not cut across another vessel with the intentions
of entering the channel first.
(i) When two vessels reach a junction or channel mouth on
reciprocal courses, the vessel with the tide against her must allow the
vessel with the tide following her to proceed first. This is because a
vessel with tide against her will have more control over her own
movement.
11. Overtaking in Narrow Channel. Overtaking is a dangerous
manoeuvre especially in a narrow channel. The ships may be subjected to
various hydrodynamic forces which may lead to inter-ship interaction and
shear from bank (Bank Effect). For these reasons, overtaking is permitted in
narrow channel with mutual consent of both vessels. The vessel being
overtaken must take all measures to ensure safety and it may if safe to do so,
move away from the side the other vessel intends to overtake. She may also
reduce speed to reduce the time both ships will run parallel close to each
other. If the channel is however wide and the vessel being overtaken does not
need to take any action to ensure safety, overtaking may take place without
consent. However it is wise to take mutual consent so as to avoid any
conflicting action by the vessel being overtaken which may not have sighted
the vessel behind.
12. Sound Signals for Overtaking. For these reasons, a vessel intending
to overtake another vessel in a narrow channel must show his intentions by
sounding a signal comprising of two prolonged blasts and one or two short
blasts (— — • or — — • •)depending upon the side she is overtaking from.
The vessel being overtaken if in agreement must sound a signal comprising of
one prolonged blast, one short blasts, one prolonged blast and one short blast
(— • — •) and take steps to permit safe passing. If the vessel being overtaken
feels that overtaking is not safe in the channel or in case of any doubt in
intentions, she must sound at least five rapid and short blasts on the whistle.
The vessels may also communicate on V/UHF to have a clear understanding
of the procedure to be followed. These sound signals are however to be made
only if the vessels are in sight of one another.
13. Bends in Narrow Channel. This <bi> rule <.bi> is intended to apply in clear
visibility. It applies to vessels when they near a bend or part of channel where
other vessels may be obscured by an intervening obstruction. On reaching
such a bend, or section of the channel, a vessel must sound one prolonged
blast (Rule 34(e)). The other vessel hearing this blast must also sound one
prolonged blast. This blast must be answered by a further signal of one
prolonged blast by the first vessel. It is important to notice here that the
signals are sounded before the vessels come in sight of one another.
14. Anchoring in Narrow Channel. A vessel must avoid anchoring in a
channel as he would pose a danger to other vessels in the channel. The
requirement is to avoid anchoring if the circumstances of the case admit.
Thick fog may not be a suitable reason. A vessel having a machinery failure
may need to anchor in emergency. In such case she must endeavor to do so
in a position where she will not obstruct the flow

<<<


When it is not prudent for a vessel to overtake another due to

● Overtaking vessel

● Shallow water

● Lack of maneuverable space

● Submerged rocks <bi> icebergs <.bi> or wrecks in the path

● Other vessels in the path

The overtaking vessel has to be warned and should postpone her actions

This <bi> rule <.bi> does not relieve the overtaking vessel of her obligation under Rule.