Rules of the road
Steering and Sailing Rules - Section One (contd.)

Rule Ten Traffic Separation Schemes (contd.)


>>> Click to see rule

a. This Rule applies to traffic separation schemes adopted by the Organization and does not relieve any vessel of her obligation under any other Rule.

b. A vessel using a traffic separation scheme shall :
i. proceed in the appropriate traffic lane in the general direction of traffic flow for that lane;
ii. so far as practicable keep clear of a traffic separation line or zone;
iii. normally join or leave a traffic lane at the termination of the lane, but when joining or leaving from either side, shall do so at as small an angle to the general direction of traffic flow as practicable.

c. A vessel shall so far as practicable avoid crossing traffic lanes, but if obliged to do so shall cross on a heading as nearly as practicable at right angles to the general direction of traffic flow.

d. i. A vessel shall not use an inshore traffic zone when she can safely use the appropriate traffic lane within the adjacent traffic separation scheme. However, vessels of less than 20 mtrs. in length, sailing vessels and vessels engaged in fishing may use the inshore traffic zone.
ii. Notwithstanding sub-paragraph d(i), a vessel may use an inshore traffic zone when en route to or from a port, offshore installation or structure, pilot station or any other place situated within the inshore traffic zone or to avoid immediate danger.

e. A vessel other than a crossing vessel or a vessel joining or leaving a lane shall not normally enter a separation zone or cross a separation line except:
i. in cases of emergency, to avoid immediate danger;
ii. to engage in fishing within a separation zone.

f. A vessel navigating in areas near the terminations of traffic separation schemes shall do so with caution.

g. A vessel shall so far as practicable avoid anchoring in a traffic separation scheme or in areas near its terminations.

h. A vessel not using a traffic separation scheme shall avoid it by as wide a margin as is practicable.

i. A vessel engaged in fishing shall not impede the passage of any vessel following a traffic lane.

j. A vessel of less than 20 mtrs. in length or a sailing vessel shall not impede the safe passage of a power-driven vessel following a traffic lane.

k. A vessel restricted in her ability to manoeuvre, when engaged in an operation for the maintenance of safety of navigation in a traffic separation scheme, is exempted from complying with this Rule to the extent necessary to carry out the operation.

l. A vessel restricted in her ability to manoeuvre, when engaged in an operation for the laying, servicing or picking up of a submarine cable within a traffic separation scheme, is exempted from complying with this Rule to the extent necessary to carry out the operation.

<<<


Some vessels may require to cross just one of two traffic lanes. If this is so, they must

● cross the one lane at right angles.

● begin changing direction in the separation zone.

● enter the second lane at as small an angle as possible, all the while exercising extra caution.
