Rules of the road
Steering and Sailing Rules - Section One

Rule Eight: Action to Avoid Collision

>>> Click to see rule

a. Any action to avoid collision shall be taken in accordance with the Rules of this Part, and if the circumstances of the case admit, be positive, made in ample time and with due regard to the observance of good seamanship.

b. Any alteration of course and/or speed to avoid collision shall, if the circumstances of the case admit, be large enough to be readily apparent to another vessel observing visually or by radar; a succession of small alterations of course and/or speed should be avoided.

c. If there is sufficient sea room, alteration of course alone may be the most effective action to avoid a close-quarters situation provided that it is made in good time, is substantial and does not result in another close-quarters situation.

d. Action taken to avoid collision with another vessel shall be such as to result in passing at a safe distance. The effectiveness of the action shall be carefully checked until the other vessel is finally past and clear.

e. If necessary to avoid collision or allow more time to assess the situation, a vessel shall slacken her speed or take all way off by stopping or reversing her means of propulsion.

f. i. A vessel which, by any of these Rules, is required not to impede the passage or safe passage of another vessel shall, when required by the circumstances of the case take early action to allow sufficient sea room for the safe passage of the other vessel.
ii. A vessel required not to impede the passage or safe passage of another vessel is not relieved of this obligation if approaching the other vessel so as to involve risk of collision and shall, when taking action, have full regard to the action which may be required by the Rules of this Part.
iii. A vessel the passage of which is not to be impeded remains fully obliged to comply with the Rules of this Part, when the two vessels are approaching one another so as to involve risk of collision.

<<<

C. If there is sufficient room the course of a vessel may be altered since it is the most effective action to prevent a collision. It should however be made with ample time to spare substantial in nature and should not result in another close-quarters situation.


A distance at which a close-quarters situation develops has been left open to debate but in 
	● restricted visibility on the open sea it is at least miles in any direction forward of the beam (typically the range of audibility of the whistle of a large vessel in still conditions)

	● At least miles on the open sea considering radar observation errors.

	● less than miles when at reduced speed in congested waters while overtaking or when a vessel is expected to pass astern.

This paragraph is similar to Recommendation 5 of the Annex to the 1960 Rules, but now applicable to all conditions of visibility.