Rules of the road
Lights and Shape

Rule Twenty Four Towing and Pushing (contd.)


>>> Click to see rule

(a) A power-driven vessel when towing shall exhibit:
(i) instead of the light prescribed in Rule 23 (a) (i) or (a) (ii), two masthead lights in a vertical line. When the length of the tow, measuring from the stern of the towing vessel to the after end of the tow exceeds 200 meters, three such lights in a vertical line;
(ii) sidelights;
(iii) a stern light;
(iv) a towing light in a vertical line above the stern light;
(v) when the length of the tow exceeds 200 meters, a diamond shape where it can best be seen.

(b) When a pushing vessel and a vessel being pushed ahead are rigidly connected in a composite unit they shall be regarded as a power-driven vessel and exhibit the lights prescribed in Rule 23.

(c) A power-driven vessel when pushing ahead or towing alongside, except in the case of a composite unit, shall exhibit;
(i) instead of the light prescribed in Rule 23(a)(i) or (a)(ii), two masthead lights in a vertical line;
(ii) sidelights;
(iii) a stern light.

(d) A power-driven vessel to which paragraphs (a) or (c) of this Rule apply shall also comply with Rule 23(a) (ii).

(e) A vessel or object being towed, other than those mentioned in paragraph (g) of this Rule, shall exhibit:
(i) sidelights;
(ii) a stern light;
(iii) when the length of the tow exceeds 200 meters, a diamond shape where it can best be seen.

(f) Provided that any number of vessels being towed alongside or pushed in a group shall be lighted as one vessel:
(i) a vessel being pushed ahead, not being part of a composite unit, shall exhibit at the forward end, sidelights;
(ii) a vessel being towed alongside shall exhibit a stern light and at the forward end, sidelights.

(g) An inconspicuous, partly submerged vessel or object, or combination of such vessels or objects being towed, shall exhibit:
(i) if it is less than 25 meters in breadth, one all-round white light at or near the forward end and one at or near the after end except that dracones need not exhibit a light at or near the forward end;
(ii) if it is 25 meters of more in breadth, two additional all-round white lights at or near the extremities of its breadth;
(iii) if it exceeds 100 meters in length, additional all-round white lights between the lights prescribed in subparagraphs (i) and (ii) so that the distance between the lights shall not exceed 100 meters;
(iv) a diamond shape at or near the aftermost extremity of the last vessel or object being towed and if the length of the tow exceeds 200 meters an additional diamond shape where it can best be seen and located as far forward as is practicable.

(h) Where from any sufficient cause it is impracticable for a vessel or object being towed to exhibit the lights or shapes prescribed in paragraph (e) or (g) of this Rule, all possible measures shall be taken to light the vessel or object towed or at least to indicate the presence of such vessel or object.

(i) Where from any sufficient cause it is impracticable for a vessel not normally engaged in towing operations to display the lights prescribed in paragraph (a) or (c) of this Rule, such vessel shall not be required to exhibit those lights when engaged in towing another vessel in distress or otherwise in need of assistance. All possible measures shall be taken to indicate the nature of the relationship between the towing vessel and the vessel being towed as authorized by Rule 36, in particular by illuminating the towline.


<<<


Tug < 50m, Tow < 200m: The tugboat displays two masthead lights in a vertical line, with sidelights (green for starboard and red for port) and a sternlight. The tow exhibits a yellow towing light above the sternlight.

Tug < 50m, Tow > 200m: The tugboat in this case has three masthead lights in a vertical line instead of two, indicating a longer tow. The side and stern lights remain the same, and the tow continues to show a yellow towing light above the sternlight.

Tug > 50m, Tow < 200m: When the tug is longer than 50 meters but the tow is still under 200 meters, it follows the same lighting pattern as a smaller tug towing under 200 meters but with an additional masthead light positioned higher.

Tug > 50m, Tow > 200m: For a larger tugboat with a tow exceeding 200 meters, it exhibits three masthead lights in a vertical line, sidelights, and a sternlight. The tow still shows a yellow towing light above the sternlight.